Add draft doc for aws cluster management via CRs (#436)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/guides/creating-clusters-via-crs-on-aws/index.md

As for now, Giant Swarm is moving towards replacing its own API with the direct cluster management via [Control Plane Kubernetes API](https://docs.giantswarm.io/basics/aws-architecture/#giant-swarm-control-plane).
Following this movement strategy, Giant Swarm API is going to be deprecated in the near feature. You can find related roadmap issue [here](https://github.com/giantswarm/roadmap/issues/90).

## How does cluster creation works now?

All the tenant clusters, created with release version 10.x.x+, are managed as [custom resources](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/) in Control Plane Kubernetes.
That means, when you're creating a new cluster via [v5](https://docs.giantswarm.io/api/#operation/addClusterV5) API, what *API* service does, it uses [Cluster API](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api) to create tenant Kubernetes control-plane CR and optional node pools CRs.
The Cluster API is a Kubernetes project to bring declarative, Kubernetes-style APIs to cluster creation, configuration, and management. It provides optional, additive functionality on top of core Kubernetes.

> On high-level Cluster API is used two manage two types of CR kinds:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On high-level Cluster API is used to manage two types of CR kinds:
```

>   -  Cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Cluster
```

  - MachineDeployment

## Cluster CRs

*Cluster* CR represents tenant cluster Kubernetes control plane.

*Cluster* CR object example :

```
apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: Cluster
metadata:
  generation: 1
  labels:
    cluster-operator.giantswarm.io/version: 2.1.1
    giantswarm.io/cluster: nzr5z
    giantswarm.io/organization: giantswarm
    release.giantswarm.io/version: 11.0.1
  name: nzr5z
  namespace: default
spec:
  infrastructureRef:
    apiVersion: infrastructure.giantswarm.io/v1alpha2
    kind: AWSCluster
    name: nzr5z
    namespace: default
```

> *Cluster* references *AWSCluster* CR, which represents actual Cluster API implementation of the cluster for AWS platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Cluster* references *AWSCluster* CR, which represents the Giant Swarm Cluster API implementation of the cluster for the AWS platform.
```

Reviewer: or is this an upstream object?

Reviewer: disregard if this is upstream

if not also apply change to below mention in machinedeployment

> +++
> title = "Creating tenant clusters on AWS via Control Plane Kubernetes API"
> description = "This guide will walk you through the process of tenant cluster creation via Control Plane Kubernetes."
> date = "2020-04-01"
> type = "page"
> weight = 100
> tags = ["tutorial"]
> +++

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
---
title: Creating tenant clusters on AWS via Control Plane Kubernetes API
description: This guide will walk you through the process of tenant cluster creation via Control Plane Kubernetes.
date: 2020-04-01
type: page
weight: 100
tags: ["tutorial"]
---
```

We converted all front matter to YAML in the meantime.

# Creating tenant clusters via the Control Plane Kubernetes API

This guide will show you how to create tenant clusters by creating and applying CRs directly to the control plane.
Previously you might have used our REST API to create clusters, however, Giant Swarm is replacing its own REST API for cluster management with the [Control Plane](https://docs.giantswarm.io/basics/aws-architecture/#giant-swarm-control-plane) Kubernetes API based on the upstream [Cluster API](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/).
Following this strategy, the Giant Swarm API is going to be deprecated in the near feature. You can find the related roadmap issue [here](https://github.com/giantswarm/roadmap/issues/90).

## How does cluster creation work now?

> Starting from version 10.0.0, Giant Swarm introduced a feature to create multiple [node pools](https://docs.giantswarm.io/basics/nodepools/) on AWS.

Reviewer 3: might make more sense with 'from version 10.0.0 on AWS, Giant Swarm introduced...` - otherwise it's easy to miss that this is not true for say, 10.0.0 on Azure

metadata:
  labels:
    cluster-operator.giantswarm.io/version: 2.1.1
    giantswarm.io/cluster: nzr5z
    giantswarm.io/machine-deployment: pv7ps
    giantswarm.io/organization: giantswarm
    release.giantswarm.io/version: 11.0.1
  name: pv7ps
  namespace: default
spec:
  selector: {}
  template:
    metadata: {}
    spec:
      bootstrap: {}
      infrastructureRef:
        apiVersion: infrastructure.giantswarm.io/v1alpha2
        kind: AWSMachineDeployment
        name: pv7ps
        namespace: default
      metadata: {}
```

*AWSMachineDeployment* CR object example:

```yaml
apiVersion: infrastructure.giantswarm.io/v1alpha2
kind: AWSMachineDeployment
metadata:
  labels:
    aws-operator.giantswarm.io/version: 8.1.1
    giantswarm.io/cluster: nzr5z
    giantswarm.io/machine-deployment: pv7ps
    giantswarm.io/organization: giantswarm
    release.giantswarm.io/version: 11.0.1
  name: pv7ps
  namespace: default
spec:
  nodePool:
    description: np1
    machine:
      dockerVolumeSizeGB: 100
      kubeletVolumeSizeGB: 100
    scaling:
      max: 10
      min: 3
  provider:
    availabilityZones:
    - eu-central-1a
    worker:
      instanceType: m4.xlarge
```

> ## How to create the cluster omitting Giant Swarm API?

Reviewer 3: 'omitting' feels weird - without? 

alternatively, it's possibly better to have this in the positive, e.g: 'How to create a cluster using Cluster API?', if you see what i mean

also, 'a' cluster, not 'the' cluster

> All the CRs, mentioned above, have the strict spec and important requirements to be considered valid. 

Reviewer 3: 'have strict spec and important', you don't need a 'the' there

description = "This guide will walk you through the process of tenant cluster creation via Control Plane Kubernetes."
date = "2020-04-01"
type = "page"
weight = 100
tags = ["tutorial"]
+++
# Creating tenant clusters via the Control Plane Kubernetes API

Starting from version 10.0.0, Giant Swarm introduced a feature to create multiple [node pools](https://docs.giantswarm.io/basics/nodepools/) on AWS.
Alongside node pools support, a new API version for cluster management was released. 
Therefore, [v5](https://docs.giantswarm.io/api/#operation/addClusterV5) API is used now within happa and [gsctl](https://docs.giantswarm.io/reference/gsctl/create-cluster/).

As for now, Giant Swarm is replacing its own REST API for cluster management with the [Control Plane](https://docs.giantswarm.io/basics/aws-architecture/#giant-swarm-control-plane) Kubernetes API based on the upstream [Cluster API](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/).
Following this strategy, the Giant Swarm API is going to be deprecated in the near feature. You can find the related roadmap issue [here](https://github.com/giantswarm/roadmap/issues/90).

## How does cluster creation work now?

> All the tenant clusters, created with release version 10.x.x+, are managed as [Cluster API](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api) [custom resources](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/) in Control Plane Kubernetes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
All the tenant clusters, created with release version 10.x.x+, are managed as [Cluster API](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api) [custom resources](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/) in the Control Plane.
```

The Cluster API is a Kubernetes project to bring declarative, Kubernetes-style APIs to cluster creation, configuration, and management. It provides optional, additive functionality on top of core Kubernetes.

That means, when you're creating a new cluster via [v5](https://docs.giantswarm.io/api/#operation/addClusterV5) API, *Giant Swarm API* service creates 
 *Cluster* and *AWSCluster* CRs in Control-Plane Kubernetes.

> On high-level Cluster API is used to manage two types of CR kinds:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
At a high-level, the Cluster API is used to manage two types of CRs:
```

>   - `Cluster` - represents a Kubernetes control plane.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - [Cluster](/reference/cp-k8s-api/clusters.cluster.x-k8s.io/) - represents a Kubernetes control plane.
```

>   - `Cluster` - represents generic Kubernetes control plane.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - `Cluster` - represents a Kubernetes control plane.
```

>   - `MachineDeployment` -  represents a node pool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - [MachineDeployment](/reference/cp-k8s-api/machinedeployments.cluster.x-k8s.io/) -  represents a node pool.
```

>   - `MachineDeployment` -  represents generic node pool.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - `MachineDeployment` -  represents a node pool.
```

> Mentioned CRs reference provider specific implementations, which in Giant Swarm case for AWS platform are:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The CRs above then reference provider specific implementations. In our case, for clusters on AWS, they are:
```

>   - `AWSCluster` - represents a tenant cluster's Kubernetes control plane.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - [AWSCluster](/reference/cp-k8s-api/awsclusters.infrastructure.giantswarm.io/) - represents a tenant cluster's Kubernetes control plane.
```

>   - `AWSCluster` - represents tenant cluster Kubernetes control plane.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - `AWSCluster` - represents a tenant cluster's Kubernetes control plane.
```

>   - `AWSMachineDeployment` -  represents tenant cluster node pools.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - [AWSMachineDeployment](/reference/cp-k8s-api/awsmachinedeployments.infrastructure.giantswarm.io/) -  represents tenant cluster node pools.
```

>   - `AWSMachineDeployment` -  represents tenant cluster node pool.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - `AWSMachineDeployment` -  represents tenant cluster node pools.
```

## Cluster CRs

> *Cluster* CR object example :

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Cluster* CR object example:
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: Cluster
metadata:
  generation: 1
  labels:
    cluster-operator.giantswarm.io/version: 2.1.1
    giantswarm.io/cluster: nzr5z
    giantswarm.io/organization: giantswarm
    release.giantswarm.io/version: 11.0.1
  name: nzr5z
  namespace: default
spec:
  infrastructureRef:
    apiVersion: infrastructure.giantswarm.io/v1alpha2
    kind: AWSCluster
    name: nzr5z
    namespace: default
```

*AWSCluster* CR object example:

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

apiVersion: infrastructure.giantswarm.io/v1alpha2
kind: AWSMachineDeployment
metadata:
  labels:
    aws-operator.giantswarm.io/version: 8.1.1
    giantswarm.io/cluster: nzr5z
    giantswarm.io/machine-deployment: pv7ps
    giantswarm.io/organization: giantswarm
    release.giantswarm.io/version: 11.0.1
  name: pv7ps
  namespace: default
spec:
  nodePool:
    description: np1
    machine:
      dockerVolumeSizeGB: 100
      kubeletVolumeSizeGB: 100
    scaling:
      max: 10
      min: 3
  provider:
    availabilityZones:
    - eu-central-1a
    worker:
      instanceType: m4.xlarge
```

## MachineDeployment CRs

*MachineDeployment* CR object example:

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: MachineDeployment
metadata:
  labels:
    cluster-operator.giantswarm.io/version: 2.1.1
    giantswarm.io/cluster: nzr5z
    giantswarm.io/machine-deployment: pv7ps
    giantswarm.io/organization: giantswarm
    release.giantswarm.io/version: 11.0.1
  name: pv7ps
  namespace: default
spec:
  selector: {}
  template:
    metadata: {}
    spec:
      bootstrap: {}
      infrastructureRef:
        apiVersion: infrastructure.giantswarm.io/v1alpha2
        kind: AWSMachineDeployment
        name: pv7ps
        namespace: default
      metadata: {}
```

*AWSMachineDeployment* CR object example:

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

apiVersion: infrastructure.giantswarm.io/v1alpha2
kind: AWSMachineDeployment
metadata:
  labels:
    aws-operator.giantswarm.io/version: 8.1.1
    giantswarm.io/cluster: nzr5z
    giantswarm.io/machine-deployment: pv7ps
    giantswarm.io/organization: giantswarm
    release.giantswarm.io/version: 11.0.1
  name: pv7ps
  namespace: default
spec:
  nodePool:
    description: np1
    machine:
      dockerVolumeSizeGB: 100
      kubeletVolumeSizeGB: 100
    scaling:
      max: 10
      min: 3
  provider:
    availabilityZones:
    - eu-central-1a
    worker:
      instanceType: m4.xlarge
```

## How to create the cluster omitting Giant Swarm API?

All the CRs, mentioned above, have the strict spec and important requirements to be considered valid. 

> There is no cluster/node pool CRs validation available in Control Plane Kubernetes of Giant Swarm for now. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There is no cluster or node pool CR validation available in the Control Plane for now. 
```

> Therefore, if you create CR with wrong field values, that can result in a broken tenant cluster.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Therefore, if you create a CR with wrong field values, that can result in a broken tenant cluster.
```

That's why we've developed a simple [kubectl gs plugin](https://github.com/giantswarm/kubectl-gs), which helps to template valid CRs.

Plugin supports rendering CRs:
  - Tenat control-plane (AWS only):
    - `Cluster` (API version `cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2`)
    - `AWSCluster` (API version `infrastructure.giantswarm.io/v1alpha2`)
  - Nodepool (AWS only):
    - `MachineDeployment` (API version `cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2`)
    - `AWSMachineDeployment` (API version `infrastructure.giantswarm.io/v1alpha2`)
  - `AppCatalog`
  - `App`

The installation procedure is described in [README](https://github.com/giantswarm/kubectl-gs#how-to-install-plugin).
There is also a [document](https://github.com/giantswarm/kubectl-gs/blob/master/docs/template-cluster-cr.md), describing the templating process in detail.

> As a result of rendering the CRs ([sample](https://github.com/giantswarm/kubectl-gs/blob/master/docs/template-cluster-cr.md#example)), a user will get a *yaml* file with a valid Cluster/Node pools definition. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As a result of rendering the CRs ([sample](https://github.com/giantswarm/kubectl-gs/blob/master/docs/template-cluster-cr.md#example)), a user will get a *yaml* file containing valid CRs that can create a tenant cluster and its node pools.
```

> The tenant cluster can be created by applying the cluster manifest file to the Giant Swarm Kubernetes Control Plane, .e.g. `kubectl create -f <cluster manifest file>.yaml`. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The tenant cluster can be created by applying the cluster manifest file to the Control Plane, .e.g. `kubectl create -f <cluster manifest file>.yaml`. 
```

+++
title = "Creating tenant clusters on AWS via Control Plane Kubernetes API"
description = "This guide will walk you through the process of tenant cluster creation via Control Plane Kubernetes."
date = "2020-04-01"
type = "page"
weight = 100
tags = ["tutorial"]
+++

> # Creating tenant clusters directly via Control Plane Kubernetes API

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
# Creating tenant clusters via the Control Plane Kubernetes API
```

> Starting from version 10.0.0, Giant Swarm introduced [node pools](https://docs.giantswarm.io/basics/nodepools/) feature for AWS platform.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Starting from version 10.0.0, Giant Swarm introduced a feature to create multiple [node pools](https://docs.giantswarm.io/basics/nodepools/) on AWS.
```

Alongside node pools support, a new API version for cluster management was released. 
Therefore, [v5](https://docs.giantswarm.io/api/#operation/addClusterV5) API is used now within happa and [gsctl](https://docs.giantswarm.io/reference/gsctl/create-cluster/).

> As for now, Giant Swarm is moving towards replacing its own API with the direct cluster management via [Control Plane Kubernetes API](https://docs.giantswarm.io/basics/aws-architecture/#giant-swarm-control-plane).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
As for now, Giant Swarm is replacing its own REST API for cluster management with the [Control Plane](https://docs.giantswarm.io/basics/aws-architecture/#giant-swarm-control-plane) Kubernetes API based on the upstream [Cluster API](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/).
```

> Following this movement strategy, Giant Swarm API is going to be deprecated in the near feature. You can find related roadmap issue [here](https://github.com/giantswarm/roadmap/issues/90).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Following this strategy, the Giant Swarm API is going to be deprecated in the near feature. You can find the related roadmap issue [here](https://github.com/giantswarm/roadmap/issues/90).
```

> ## How does cluster creation works now?

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## How does cluster creation work now?
```

> All the tenant clusters, created with release version 10.x.x+, are managed as [custom resources](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/custom-resources/) in Control Plane Kubernetes.

Reviewer 3: This feels a little off - all tenant clusters ever have been created with CRs - aws 10+ is specifically cluster api CRs, no?

Reviewer 5: Yes compatibility towards cluster api is the key here.

> That means, when you're creating a new cluster via [v5](https://docs.giantswarm.io/api/#operation/addClusterV5) API, what *API* service does, it uses [Cluster API](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api) to create tenant Kubernetes control-plane CR and optional node pools CRs.

Reviewer 5: Same here. The API always created the necessary CRs for the operators to create the infrastructure.

The Cluster API is a Kubernetes project to bring declarative, Kubernetes-style APIs to cluster creation, configuration, and management. It provides optional, additive functionality on top of core Kubernetes.

> On high-level Cluster API is used to manage two types of CR kinds:

Reviewer 5: There are more CRDs in the Cluster API. Do you mean in our current implementation of the cluster API?

Author: I meant current only, or better to say the part we/customer work with

  - Cluster
  - MachineDeployment

## Cluster CRs

*Cluster* CR represents tenant cluster Kubernetes control plane.

*Cluster* CR object example :

```
apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: Cluster
metadata:
  generation: 1
  labels:
    cluster-operator.giantswarm.io/version: 2.1.1
    giantswarm.io/cluster: nzr5z
    giantswarm.io/organization: giantswarm
    release.giantswarm.io/version: 11.0.1
  name: nzr5z
  namespace: default
spec:
  infrastructureRef:
    apiVersion: infrastructure.giantswarm.io/v1alpha2
    kind: AWSCluster
    name: nzr5z
    namespace: default
```

*Cluster* references *AWSCluster* CR, which represents the Giant Swarm Cluster API implementation of the cluster for the AWS platform.

*AWSCluster* CR object example:

```
apiVersion: infrastructure.giantswarm.io/v1alpha2
kind: AWSMachineDeployment
metadata:
  labels:
    aws-operator.giantswarm.io/version: 8.1.1
    giantswarm.io/cluster: nzr5z
    giantswarm.io/machine-deployment: pv7ps
    giantswarm.io/organization: giantswarm
    release.giantswarm.io/version: 11.0.1

>   name: pv7ps

Reviewer 3: For ease, let's make the IDs match - this should be `nzr5z`, no?

Author: No, this is node pool ID. And `nzr5z` is control-plane ID

  namespace: default
spec:
  nodePool:
    description: np1
    machine:
      dockerVolumeSizeGB: 100
      kubeletVolumeSizeGB: 100
    scaling:
      max: 10
      min: 3
  provider:
    availabilityZones:
    - eu-central-1a
    worker:
      instanceType: m4.xlarge
```

> So, when the release 10.x.x+ in AWS installation is used, *Giant Swarm API* service creates *Cluster* and *AWSCluster* CRs in Control-Plane Kubernetes.

Reviewer 3: Yeah it's probably easier to specify that this is for all Cluster API versions earlier, and state those versions. then, you won't need to qualify this so much later

        namespace: default
      metadata: {}
```

As with *Cluster* CR, *MachineDeployment* has the reference to infrastructure object. In this case, it is *AWSMachineDeployment*, which represents the Giant Swarm Cluster API implementation of node pool for the AWS platform.

*AWSMachineDeployment* CR object example:

```
apiVersion: infrastructure.giantswarm.io/v1alpha2
kind: AWSMachineDeployment
metadata:
  labels:
    aws-operator.giantswarm.io/version: 8.1.1
    giantswarm.io/cluster: nzr5z
    giantswarm.io/machine-deployment: pv7ps
    giantswarm.io/organization: giantswarm
    release.giantswarm.io/version: 11.0.1
  name: pv7ps
  namespace: default
spec:
  nodePool:
    description: np1
    machine:
      dockerVolumeSizeGB: 100
      kubeletVolumeSizeGB: 100
    scaling:
      max: 10
      min: 3
  provider:
    availabilityZones:
    - eu-central-1a
    worker:
      instanceType: m4.xlarge
```

## How to create the cluster omitting Giant Swarm API?

All the CRs, mentioned above, have the strict spec and important requirements to be considered valid. 
There is no cluster/node pool CRs validation available in Control Plane Kubernetes of Giant Swarm for now. 

> Therefore, if you create CR with wrong field values, that can result in a broken tenant cluster, which then causes unwanted alerts in Giant Swarm monitoring system.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure if users care about unwanted alerts, just having broken clusters is bad enough :D

That's why we've developed a simple [kubectl gs plugin](https://github.com/giantswarm/kubectl-gs), which helps to template valid CRs.

Plugin supports rendering CRs:
  - Tenat control-plane (AWS only):
    - `Cluster` (API version `cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2`)
    - `AWSCluster` (API version `infrastructure.giantswarm.io/v1alpha2`)
  - Nodepool (AWS only):
    - `MachineDeployment` (API version `cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha2`)
    - `AWSMachineDeployment` (API version `infrastructure.giantswarm.io/v1alpha2`)
  - `AppCatalog`
  - `App`

The installation procedure is described in [README](https://github.com/giantswarm/kubectl-gs#how-to-install-plugin).

> There is also [document](https://github.com/giantswarm/kubectl-gs/blob/master/docs/template-cluster-cr.md), describing the templating process in details.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
There is also a [document](https://github.com/giantswarm/kubectl-gs/blob/master/docs/template-cluster-cr.md), describing the templating process in detail.
```

> As a result of running CRs rendering([sample](https://github.com/giantswarm/kubectl-gs/blob/master/docs/template-cluster-cr.md#example)), user gets *yaml* file with the valid Cluster/Node pool definitions. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
As a result of rendering the CRs ([sample](https://github.com/giantswarm/kubectl-gs/blob/master/docs/template-cluster-cr.md#example)), a user will get a *yaml* file with a valid Cluster/Node pools definition. 
```

> Now tenant cluster control-plane and node pool can be created just by applying those CRs to the Giant Swarm Kubernetes Control Plane, .e.g. `kubectl create -f <CRs definition file>.yaml`. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The tenant cluster can be created by applying the cluster manifest file to the Giant Swarm Kubernetes Control Plane, .e.g. `kubectl create -f <cluster manifest file>.yaml`. 
```

Reviewer 5: Maybe we should use either "definition" or "manifest". Also in the sentence before.
